.TH NANOTTS "1" "JUNE 2025" "nanotts" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
nanotts \- Small footprint text to speech
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B nanotts [ OPTIONS ]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.\" Add any additional description here
Nanotts generates audio speech from input text, which may be played
back immediately, written to a file, or both.  Nanotts is a much
improved version of pico2wave with a better user experience.
.\" .SH OPTIONS
.\" .TP
.\" \fB\-x, --xxxxx\fR
.\" This is not really an option, this is just a template for the man
.\" page for when the real options get implemented.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-c\fR
Send raw PCM output to stdout
.TP
\fB\-f filename\fR
Read input text from the specified file
.TP
\fB\-h, --help\fR
Print out help text and then exit
.TP
\fB\-i "text"\fR
Use quoted argument as input instead of reading from a file or standard input
.TP
\fB\-l directory\fR
Set Lingware voices directory. (defaults: "./lang", "/usr/share/pico/lang/")
.TP
\fB\-m, --no-play\fR
Do not play output to audio device
.TP
\fB\-o filename\fR
Write output to WAV/PCM file (enables WAV output)
.TP
\fB\-p, --play\fR
Play output to audio device
.TP
\fB\--pitch <0.5-2.0>\fR
Change the pitch of the voice
.TP
\fB\--speed <0.5-2.0>\fR
Change the speed of the voice
.TP
\fB\--prefix\fR
Set the file prefix (eg. "MyRecording-").  Generated files will be auto-numbered.
This option is good for running multiple times with different inputs
.TP
\fB\-w, --wav\fR
Write output to WAV file, will generate filename if '-o' option not provided
.TP
\fB\--version\fR
Displays version information about this program
\fB\-v, --voice <voice>
Select voice. The default voice is en-GB.  Possible voices are en-US, en-GB, de-DE, es-ES, fr-FR, it-IT
\fB\--volume <0.0-5.0>\fR
Set voice volume (>1.0 may result in degraded quality)
.SH EXAMPLES
.nf
nanotts -f ray_bradbury.txt -o ray_bradbury.wav
echo "Mary had a little lamb" | nanotts --play
nanotts -i "Once upon a midnight dreary" -v en-US --speed 0.8 --pitch 1.8 -w -p
echo "Brave Ulysses" | nanotts -c | play -r 16k -L -t raw -e signed -b 16 -c 1 -
.fi
.PP
.br
